at the end of chris's talk
uh during the this break chris will be
um signing his new book and um i don't
know if he was going to tell you this or
not so i'll tell you
the uh the book is called lsd and the
mind of the universe
and it's based uh on his experiential
work with lsd
and he got the publisher they were going
to publish it
put it out in december and he got them
to agree
to put out an advanced printing
for this conference so this weekend is
the debut of the book
yeah right
and um i don't know there's going to be
enough copies for all the people that
will really want this book
because i've i've read the book um
uh i i offered because i'm so enamored
of chris's work to write an endorsement
for it and
so he stuck me in there with some of the
other big shots that gave him
endorsements
um and so i've read the electronic
version of this book and
it's a mind blower i'm not kidding it is
a mind blower so
give a warm welcome to chris bash please
[Applause]
give me just a second folks to hook up
my technology
fingers crossed
okay can you give me powerpoint on all
three
okay all right
is my is this mic working no
is it working now okay
[Laughter]
mercury retrograde right all right
okay okay
oh yeah great okay
okay thank you
all right how the technology moves
forward
it's wonderful to be here with you again
after last year this is such a wonderful
community
when i was here last year i spoke to you
about a book that i was just finishing
that i was calling diamonds from heaven
and it describes a 20-year journey of
using
uh high doses of lsd 73 sessions
over 20 years to explore the structure
of the universe
that book is now here do we have it
okay let's see do we have it here
oh come on work for me
okay let's see one here we go
there it is publisher change the title
but in my heart
it will always be diamonds from heaven
[Applause]
i want to say upfront that i'm not sure
that what i did was wise
honestly i mean that i pushed myself
extremely hard on this journey harder
than was probably good for me but i've
come through it intact
reasonably so and i'm really looking
forward to sharing with you
where this journey took me and to share
it with the world and it's not because i
think my experiences are in any way
unique or special
but they are a particularly i think
well-focused exploration
of the structure of the universe and i
want to say clearly that i did this work
not as a therapist and not really
seeking therapy
so all honor and and deep respect
to all the psychedelic therapists in the
room
this is a different agenda what i was
primarily seeing i was trained as a
philosopher of religion
and what i was primarily seeking was an
understanding
of our universe as deeply as i could get
by sinking deep into my own
consciousness
and in those deep states of
consciousness exploring the structure
the deep structure of the universe
itself
now i want to ground this story
in the context of our collective
psychedelic experience let's see
is my mic on yet do we this no this one
no okay sooner or later it'll come on
i like to walk but okay
[Music]
is it on now it's on okay good
pump the volume a little bit okay
how many we have so many people working
in
so many different psychedelic mediums in
this room right
so many different substances so many
different forms and so many different
agendas
all honor to the psychedelic community
and all the work that we are doing
collectively
what i'm bringing to you today is the
story of one particular
journey into the universe one particular
method
one particular format all right which
does not negate in any way
any of the other dimensions of the
dimensions that we're exploring
it is simply one voice in our collective
expression
so let's go into it
let's see i got two clickers here which
one is going to work
huh
okay looks like it's this is a winner
okay
this is my psychedelic lineage my
psychedelic lineage basically grounds in
stan groff's work
when i was 29 years old fresh out of
graduate school just beginning my
academic career
in ohio i met stan's work
his work realms of the human unconscious
and then his book lsd psychotherapy
which is this fundamental manual for
working psychedelic sessions
changed my life turned my life around
pointed me a completely different
direction
and it has become my entire life's work
now in in terms of the sessions
themselves of structuring sessions i
want to emphasize
i've never tripped i've never gone to a
concert on lsd
i've never spent the night all night
tripping with my friends and talking
about things
it's not that those are bad things those
can be fine but in my work
every time i took lsd i was working in a
very very carefully controlled
environment
i was isolated i was in my home i was
are in my wife's office i was totally
perfected
protected from the world i did always
solo work i didn't work in groups there
are advantages for working in groups or
advantages for doing solo work
just owning mine was always solo work
which allowed me to go
to follow exactly where the experiences
were taking me
and to push myself in that direction
wherever it would take me
in stan's work
are we not getting
ah okay
come on okay
clearly two different therapeutic
modality that stan
outlines psycholytic low-dose therapy
psychedelic high-dose therapy
psycholytic low-dose maybe about 200
micrograms
where the psyche peels itself layer by
layer we move into it layer by layer
sessions up to about 100 sessions
psychedelic therapy
very very different therapy uh very
concentrated
very intense experiences the goal is not
to work
through all the layers of the personal
unconscious but to sort of blow through
the psychodynamic level of consciousness
and to trigger an experience of
transcendence and experience
basically they were trying to trigger
near-death episode experiences
working with people who were terminally
ill they were going to die
and they were working with the anxiety
that they were facing as they were going
towards
the death this form of therapy was
limited to three sessions
in spring grove hospital no more than
three sessions
so i came along and i thought well okay
if it can be done safely three times it
can be done safely more than three times
and it can be done safely more than
three times but i found
that it was a much much more demanding
protocol
than i had anticipated in the beginning
and it took all of my research my
resources
to basically manage what unfolded in
this journey
this is not a therapeutic journey it's a
journey of cosmological exploration
and therefore it requires something of
an explorous constitution
and it also requires something of an
explorers
preparation an explorer's position in
life where you have the opportunity
where you can push this deeply
this far beyond the edges beyond the
maps where most people have gone
when i got to the end of this journey
and was writing up my
accounts and was looking back over the
whole thing i realized
well i thought i was just doing an
extended course of
psychedelic therapy high dose therapy
but what i realized was
that this process that i had gotten
engaged in
went so deep and went so far
and generated complications that were so
intense
i had to give it a different name so i
call it
do i have it right psychedelic
exploration
the method is the method of psychedelic
therapy
total isolation always working with a
sitter
carefully selected music you know the
whole works there
the difference is the number of sessions
involved
for me 73 sessions i did three sessions
at the psychodynamic level i did three
sessions about 200 micrograms
and then after that all of my sessions
were at 500
600 micrograms again
this is not a protocol that i recommend
i wouldn't do it that way again
i would do it differently i would
balance the plant medicines
more with the synthetic psychedelic
medicines
i would really only push myself
periodically with high doses rather than
pushing myself so relentlessly in that
way
i have worked with psilocybin i have
worked with ayahuasca
and salvia divinorum a number of plant
medicines
i did most of that work after i stopped
my lsd work
but lsd in the mind of the universe is
really focused specifically on what
happened
on this high-dose journey
i want to emphasize that the
circumstances in which i did this work
were kind of unusual in that they were
very very
stable and concentrated and focused
in all of my work i had the same sitter
for all these years the same sentence
setting
same intention same location all in
northeast ohio
same substance same dose level
and the same recording process always
recording every
every session as completely as possible
within 24 hours of the session
okay what this did i've come to
appreciate when you stabilize your work
in this way when you
eliminate as many variables as possible
and using the same methodology in the
same consistency
it stabilizes the conversation that
opens up between you and the creative
intelligence of the universe
it stabilizes the communion so that one
session leads to another session leads
to another session
in a very coherent intelligent manner
even though you may not understand all
the details of the continuity
when it's unfolding when you're looking
out over a longer period
of your work you can begin to understand
the patterns of continuity that you are
in dialogue
with in a sense a single intelligence
in this process i i say that it
carefully because
there's so many layers to this
intelligence there's so many forms of
this intelligence
but in the end when you see the the
continuity across sessions it you're si
can't help but feel like you're engaging
a single creative intelligence
now i kept detailed records of my work
i have about 400 pages of session notes
again
recording the session always within 24
hours
because you know what it's like two or
three days later things are not as clear
as when you did it right the day after
i kept track of all the dates of the
sessions
i even plotted the astrological
variables late in the work i used
astrology to choose the dates of my
sessions i was working on average about
five sessions a year
now i worked for four years i stopped
for six years
for reasons that are not important to go
into now they're in the book
and then i picked up for another 10
years of very intense work
i worked about five sessions a year and
so i looked when i became aware of rick
tarniss and stan groff's hypothesis
of the relationship between the outer
planets and and transit astrology
global transits and my psychedelic
sessions i wanted to study this so i
looked at that attracted those variables
and there's an appendix on that issue
in the back of uh the living class of
llc in the mind of the universe i keep
wanting to say diamonds from heaven
i have to retrain myself
now the story i'm telling
in lsd in the mind of the universe is
not primarily a personal story
there was a personal story there was
personal healing there were personal
insights
but what i found was that when i was
doing this work
the personal components generally tend
to manifest
in the beginning of a session and at the
end of the session
when i was leaving space-time and when i
was coming back into space-time
that's not entirely correct because
sometimes a whole session was spent in
personal healing
but in general after about the first 15
sessions
when i was at the peak of the sessions
as indicated in these large circles in
this series of
sine waves which represent a series of
sessions
when i was at that those peak hours i
was operating far beyond
personal reality okay that's the story
i'm trying to tell
in lsd in the mind of the universe i've
dropped out a lot of the personal story
because from a philosophical perspective
that that
from a therapeutic perspective that's
relevant but from a philosophical
perspective
it's the large story which is the more
important story
a lot of work at the medical level at
the therapeutic level really focuses on
ego dissolution transcending the
limitations of your physical body
entering into a deeper communion into
mystical experiences
what i found was when you'd when i did
this work
it wasn't just one cycle of death
rebirth now
in this image the uh the drop at the
bottom of the circle represents egoic
awareness our time space awareness
the line rep everything below the line
is physical reality everything above the
line is transpersonal reality or
spiritual reality
a lot of work a lot of discussion
focuses on that first circle the death
rebirth of ego
and that's an important place to focus
it is the fundamental transition
what i found in my work was you actually
go through
multiple levels of death and rebirth and
it's not ego dying over and over again
you're going through death and rebirth
processes which take place
at different levels of the universe at
different levels of
of the creative intelligence of the
universe and the deaths and rebirths
at the higher levels are different
than the death and rebirth at the
beginning level when you're shedding
time and space
when you're shedding your identity built
up in time and space
they're harder to describe because you
know
the levels of consciousness that you're
born into in the beginning
you're born out of at the end when
you're being born
into the species mind it has a certain
set of
qualities and characteristics but when
you are shedding the species mine
when you are going beyond the collective
psyche when you are entering into
archetypal reality
that is a different pattern of death and
rebirth
now i follow i use stan groff's category
stan talks about
psychic level transpersonal experience
high and low psychic
high and low subtle level high and low
causal level
that's a kind of convenient category but
of course
how can we possibly describe the full
spectrum of the divine experience of
spiritual experience
with simply three or six categories
these are simply rough approximations
which are useful
in order to describe certain transitions
that took place
on this journey
when i got to the end of the journey and
i was kind of working and crunching all
the
experiences and putting them all
together for the book
i realized that i began to count up how
many
fundamental deep death oops oops hi
sorry i'm jumping ahead of myself
these cycles of death and rebirth are
kind of really like tauruses
you kind of break through you open up
you expand into a new level
and then there's a sense of gathering in
everything that took place
blowing through into another level and
then
you explore that level you become
competent and stabilize states of
consciousness at that level
there's a kind of a gathering in and
then that
if you follow the process through takes
you into yet another death and rebirth
process
into a deeper level and one of the
ways i kind of image this is in terms of
a nuclear explosion
now this image triggers very very deep
responses in us and it should this
is this is an image of humanity's
insanity at one level but i don't wanna
i wanna don't wanna go there i wanna use
it simply to
make one point when you go through
deep deep death and rebirth processes
where you are
shattering every level that you have
known
and in not only in earth but everything
that you have known in some
sessions it drops you deeper into the
universe
and it allows levels of reality to come
into your awareness
which were not in your awareness before
they were always there
but you were not experiencing them and
there is something like that that
happens with a nuclear explosion
when this explosion drives deeper into
the atmosphere
it brings out levels of the atmosphere
which previously you could not see
and something like that happens with the
lsd work or
any kind of deep psychotherapy deep
psychedelic work
it brings you into levels that
previously you were not aware of
now the dualism here is i want to
dissolve the dualism now because
the nuclear explosion the center and the
levels of reality one is
entering or in this image are two
different things
now dissolve that duality because when
one dies
at that level you literally dissolve
into that field of reality
you dissolve into that strata
that stratum of reality
but we're not talking about bombs here
we're talking about
the universe exploring the nature of the
cosmos itself
when i got to the end of my work and i
was kind of counting up
out of all the deaths and all the
purifications and all the purgations how
many
core fundamental levels of reality did i
go through i counted five here they are
first the death of self transcending
our time space identity our egoic
reality
after that something that took place at
the collective mind
transcending the individual mind
something is taking place at the level
of species consciousness
after that something that took place at
the archetypal level
at the archetypal dimension of mind
and then something that took place in
what i call
causal oneness now oneness of course
comes up
many many levels oneness can come up in
the first ego death oneness is a
fundamental truth and it occurs in many
different forms
there's something distinctive and unique
about causal oneness or oneness at
causal level reality
because here you're dealing with
there is no outside to reality when
you're in causal oneness
you are not experiencing oneness you are
in
the condition in which the universe
experiences itself
as being fundamentally unified with no
core divisions whatsoever at any level
physical spiritual reincarnational
it's a fundamental core oneness of
reality
and then at the last level what i call
diamond luminosity what buddhism calls
dharmakaya the pure light of absolute
reality
so let me use these five categories
and then show you how these lay out
in the chapters of lsd in the mind of
the universe
and then i'm just going to share some
observations on each of these categories
as we go through
just to kind of give a quick overview
death of self there's a chapter
crossing the boundary of birth and death
i'm going to go back into these in more
detail in a minute but just to give you
where it is in the book now there is a
chapter
one which is the chapter on methodology
it's a rather long chapter in the book
because i really wanted to be very very
clear
on the methodology that i used and some
of the ways of working with psychedelics
at this level
and there's a chapter after this called
a session day because someone
had asked me why don't you just kind of
take us into a typical day
and show us what happens and so i did i
kind of
wrote a narrative of a typical session
day but in terms of the levels of
consciousness those
three levels of consciousness really
kind of function
at the death of self
my wife is taking care of me by the way
i didn't mention
i forgot astrology
working with astrology and psychedelic
sessions
really really interesting insights
emerge my wife christina
is a professional astrologer and she
kind of helps me
understand some of the archetypal
dynamics that are operating in some of
the session material
okay collective mind there are three
chapters that have to do with the
collective mind
the ocean of suffering sort of
the challenging purifying part of
working with the species mind
deep time in the soul
an initiation into the universe i'm
going to come back to these in a minute
archetypal mind there is a chapter
the greater reel of archetypal reality
calls a oneness the chapter of
benediction of blessings
then we move to diamond luminosity a
chapter
diamond luminosity but before i discuss
diamond luminosity
i have a chapter called the birth of the
future human
which actually describes a series of
visionary
experiences that started at the
initiation of the universe
and continued all the way into the final
chapter
into from session 22 to session 70
is one of the most consistent recurring
themes
what's happening to humanity where are
we going what is our historical time in
history
what's happening at the deep structural
level
and then diamond luminosity and
then the last chapter final vision where
i was given the last
what i call the last of the great
visions of the journey
and then the goodbye sessions the
wrap-up sessions
so let me go back and just offer a few
observations
on each of these levels
first let me check my time okay that's
not bad we're okay
first crossing the boundary of death and
birth
how many people here know the work of
stanislav groff
okay then you know
exactly what i'm going to be talking
about here because this is the perinatal
level of consciousness this is that
level that
is the boundary level between space-time
consciousness
and first transpersonal reality when i
got into this level i felt like a poster
child for stan's perinatal
uh level of consciousness intense
intense physical purifications um
fetal sensations reliving aspects of
birth
tremendous psychological uh existential
angst uh the questioning the fundamental
meaningfulness of life
confronting the meaninglessness of life
and then eventually
uh ego death a complete shattering of
egoic reality the ego is a tough son of
a [__]
but in the final analysis it's not that
hard to take apart
it's harder to heal than it is to
shatter it's kind of curious
but on these last two sessions this is
two and a half years work in ten
sessions
at the end of these sessions the last
two sessions it just took me and snapped
me like a twig
i started the day as a white male
highly educated academic obsessed with
the meaning of life
it totally inverted all of those
variables it turned me into women
turned me into women of color turmey and
the women at the laundromat with
no prospects turned me into women who
had no interest
whatsoever in philosophy or the meaning
of anything
of life at all of course it wasn't women
that were the problem of course and it
wasn't a lack of education
that was a problem it was what it was
the social identity
that i had internalized and accepted as
what i am
that was the problem and the universe
forced me to become the opposite of what
i was
and just snapped me and when eventually
i let go and surrendered to that
experience
i entered the world of women under the
arm of the great mother
and i was taken through the experience
of hundreds and hundreds of women's
lives
it was just an extraordinary
transformation in my own experience i
wish every man could have the experience
and i'm sure
many of the men in this room have had
that kind of experience
of experiencing so deeply the the inner
essence and the inner experience of the
so-called opposite sex
now i believe in reincarnation i've
written a book on reincarnation
i think we've all lived lives as men and
women but what was happening here was
i was not being invited to
reclaim my former lives as women
this was different this was saying
where you are going gender does not
exist
let go and so i let go and i
entered into spiritual reality
what happened next much to my surprise
is that things didn't get easier things
got harder
after going through a transition
experience in which my compassion was
expanded and open to the suffering of
the world i entered
a domain of collective suffering and
anguish
and and pain which deepened
session by session systematically and it
deepened for two years
it took two years and 14 sessions to go
through all
of this work there was a year of the
ocean of suffering
before i stopped my sessions for the six
years
i stopped for six years and then i
started again
six years later under completely
different
a different time in life different set
of expectations
and different astrological transits but
at the
other side of that six year gap the
ocean of suffering started exactly
where it had stopped six years before
which i think is a measure of the
intelligence and the intentionality
of the consciousness of directing our
work
when the ocean of suffering opened at
first i thought
that this represented a deepening of my
ego death
i thought i was being you know kind of
cleaned up
more and this is kind of implicit in
stan's theory he sees
he recognizes and he's he's witnessed
these collective ordeals
but stan sees these collective ordeals
or at least he did
he saw these collective ordeals as being
drawn in through resonance to ego death
all right so it's ego death which is
really the primary driver
and when you get into ego death in the
context of the collective psyche you can
tap into some of the suffering of
humanity that's still stored in the
collective psyche and it seeps into your
experiences through
through resonance
that's what i so i went with that
interpretation at first but what i found
was
that this went on for so long it was so
extreme and it lasted for so many years
and it
involved so many millions and millions
of beings
that i decided that this could not be
correct
eventually i came to the conclusion that
these sessions were not trying to sort
of
purify me or heal me or transform me
these experiences were aimed at nothing
less than the transformation of the
collective psyche
of our planet it was about healing the
entire planet in some way shape or form
somewhere in working with very very
intense states of consciousness
something happens that there is a flip
and what had started out in my mind as
personal transformation was taken over
by the work of collective transformation
now i don't think anything anyone did
this to me
nobody it was no trick that was done to
me
i accept responsibility for this this is
simply part of my karmic contract in
this lifetime
and i think it's part of the government
contract of a lot of people in this room
right the work you take on in your deep
deep work
is often disproportionate to anything
that makes sense in terms of your
personal life story
even your personal former life life
story
many of us get into work so so deep
that you have to open up to a deeper
understanding
of what's actually taking place in these
sessions
especially at this time in history if we
were doing this work maybe
500 years ago maybe not so
but this time at this time in history
the work of the hour
is collective transformation our species
is going into a near extinction event we
do not have time to [__] around
we are getting this is serious work here
and if you are open
if you are open and willing to let this
work come through and i'm not saying
everybody should be and i'm not saying
that it's necessarily a healthy thing in
many circumstances it can be
overwhelming and it can be intimidating
and you do not want to go there
but if you're open if you're capable and
if it is part
of your karmic contract the work we do
in these deep sessions
i think there are more bodhisattvas on
this planet than we might
think initially the work we do is for
our collective transformation
now in my experience working at high
doses
every session kind of breaks down into
two phases there's a purification phase
and an ecstatic phase there's kind of
the the dark
hard death dying kind of phase
and then there's the static phase
if you in reference to this work
and james excellent talk this morning
about shadow work and engaging the
shadow
in working as i did in a non-therapeutic
modality
one of the great gifts i learned from
stan groff is to completely
absolutely surrender to whatever is
taking place in your sessions and let it
take you as far
wherever as wants to take you now
remember these are not tripping
there's no confusion in the outer world
there's nothing going on in the outer
world that's getting into my inner space
i know that anything i am confronting is
coming entirely
from within or through within if you
submit my experiences if you submit
completely
to whatever is taking place in that
context it will take you deeper and
deeper it'll take you into
sometimes unspeakable anguish and
completely
inexplicable anguish into chaos into
into just terrible suffering
confusion but if you let it do that
eventually that will come to a crescendo
it'll peak and then it'll take you
through
to something that lies on the other side
you enter into the ecstatic phase of the
session into the teachings
phase of the session into the
cosmological phase of the session
even if the next session you may come
back around
and enter back into the suffering again
but if you go through this process into
the surrender
death and rebirth process and let it
take you
there is a deeper deep underlying
dynamic that's
maybe not be clear to you at the time
that unfolds itself over time
often you cannot understand what's
happening to you
in the pain part of a session you cannot
understand the logic of the pain
until you have moved on to the next
stage because often these
transformations it's not until you're
looking from a higher state of
consciousness
that you can understand what you were
engaging at this lower state of
consciousness
you understand
it's really important to follow this all
the way through because if you follow
the pain
all the way through what happens is you
go from suffering
to resolution to peace
and what you internalize therefore is
the entire cycle
and this is what prevents the suffering
from being lodged in your system it's
unintegrated trauma
or some kind of something you have to
deal with i
have gone through terrible terrible
suffering i don't have any
negative ramifications or after effects
of that suffering
because you internalize the suffering
resolution peace
suffering resolution you learn to trust
to trust the cycle and to trust that
there is an intelligence that's behind
this dynamic process
when i came out of the ocean of
suffering in that first year's work
i was spun into what i call deep time
and i was given the experience for one
year seven sessions
over and over again consistently
methodically laying out
i experienced the total the whole of my
life from beginning to end
as a simultaneous now deep time
i called it whole time first and then i
called it deep
time deep time is not eternity it's not
timelessness
that's something different deep time is
moving into a state of awareness where
you can experience different spans of
time
as simultaneously present i experienced
all the time moments of my life as
simultaneously present
and i experienced it like a tree
the the deepest themes of my life were
the deep branches which had been
rece the biggest branches which had
received most of the energy
the my most recent experiences were the
leaves
at the edges of the before i died where
the leaves at the edges of my
of the tree but all of them being
simultaneously present
when i first went into this state
in the 11th session when i came out of
it
i couldn't remember it it was the most
meaningful experience of my life
hours before but when i came out of it i
could barely reconstruct the edges of it
it took me months to recover the pieces
of the session
but what i found was if you go back
again
and again and again at that edge to your
living edge in your sessions
what i found was you understand more
you're able to remember more
things that didn't make sense in the
beginning begin to make sense the pieces
begin to cohere
fragments begin become uh integrated
gestalts
this is an important epistemological
point
when you break through into a new level
of consciousness
you often get fragmented you can't
maintain coherence because you're in a
totally different cognitive reality
but if you go back with clear focus and
intent
and clear setting isolation clear
setting
you go back again and again your cog
you learn to be aware in levels of
consciousness that in the beginning just
swallowed you
you learn i learned how to stay
conscious in deep time
and this is something which happened
again and again when i would break
through to a deeper level of
consciousness
there was often a fragmented quality i
couldn't remember i could only get
details that hold on to details but over
time
those details began to coalesce they
began to become
complete patterns of understanding
reincarnation was this whole inside of
my life from beginning to end was all
kind of
saturated with insights of karma and
uh the intentionality the deeper
intentionality that binds us
into the world of time and space i wrote
life cycles
not mentioning psychedelic work by my
first book life cycles is about
reincarnation in the web of life
for me reincarnation is just a
fundamental axiom
if you don't understand reincarnation
then you just don't understand what the
hell is going on
in this world you just have to to see
the deeper patterns
six year break had two more children
wrote a book got promoted six years
started again ocean of suffering starts
exactly where it had stopped before
but now in the ecstatic portion of the
sessions
totally different world it started me
completely beyond personal reality
i was given a series of seven
initiations
into the universe it was as if
it was not as if it was the creative
intelligence some creative intelligence
took me and basically gave me a course
in cosmology 101.
it just took me through and gave me a
series of experiences that she
that deepened my understanding of what's
going on
in the universe now
i name i give each of my sessions a name
because i'm trying to hold
all of my sessions in my mind all at the
same time
so i give them a name that reflects the
pith of the session
and i actually will break my sessions
into bullet points as well
so here are the names of the sessions
that were
that i deal with in the chapter the
initiation into the universe
the first uni creating was an
exploration
of the very uh the co-creation of the
universe i just
the the i i won't go into the details
i it's so attempting can't go into
details just the book
the cosmic tour was just an
extraordinary tour
of the universe this intelligence that
took me somewhere
it would show me things show me how
things were working
sometimes i didn't understand it'd come
back for me and
everything would get bigger and i would
understand and it would take me on
it was just extraordinary journey
council of elders was actually a session
which was teaching me
how to keep my cognition coherent with
respect to levels of reality
it's really important when you have a
substance that allows you to break
through multiple levels of reality
you have to train yourself to keep your
experience coherent with respect to
levels of reality
okay that was part of a training
exercise
dying into oneness was an experience of
just repeatedly dying and deeper and
deeper love death thou
death by death deeper into
oneness the master plan i'll come back
to
healing the collective wound was
basically a
kind of an orgy of pain and suffering
and then i was spun deep into archetypal
reality
and the collective suffering the ocean
of suffering never returned
it never returned now it's not like the
the world isn't suffering it's not that
there isn't pain in the collective
psyche
but my work with the ocean of suffering
was time limited
and we went on to another level and what
i learned later
is that you don't abandon your species
when you go deeper beyond the ocean of
suffering or deeper beyond the pain of
the species
you actually become more useful to it by
in the beginning you're sucking pain out
of the collective psyche
but later you're pouring grace and joy
and insight into the collective psyche
from higher levels of consciousness
i have to speed up i'm getting the time
signatures here
the greater reel of archetypal reality
when i entered archetypal reality my
identity as a human being began to fall
away from me
i found out that we have an identity a
deep deep visceral identity which is
deeper than our
individual egoic identity and to die as
a human being
is deeper than to die as an individual
human being
and if in order to go into archetypal
reality
i had to literally cease to function
at a cognitive level that had anything
to do
with human cognition i had to be willing
to give that
up in order to learn how to acclimate
into flows of reality that were
radically
profoundly beyond not only my individual
existence
but beyond human existence i moved
outside the human
field two levels of archetypal reality
one high platonic level where i
experienced something like what
plato is pointing to except that plato
describes archetypes as eternal forms in
the mind of an unchanging god
that's not how i experienced them i
experienced them as
vast living massive beings that were
just
so overwhelmingly i could not wrap my
mind around them
they're just totally beyond my capacity
to comprehend i could touch them
experience
pieces but they just were far far too
large
at a lower level of archetypal reality
at a lower subtle level
entering deep into the collective
unconscious of humanity
deep into the species mind experiencing
patterns that experiencing the human
species
as a single being
and experience networks of intelligence
weaving together
our individual efforts our individual
minds our individual karma
into larger patterns which were how the
species
as a whole lived and breathed
i think i was being given a crash course
on how our species works as a single
organism
in order to prepare the way for what
came next
at archetypal reality here are the
sessions that i address
and notice how much cleansing is taking
place
at this level the 28th session
was an extraordinarily positive session
it was of my first contact with causal
level reality
tremendous ordeal but then spinning out
into causal of reality incredibly
beautiful
clear gorgeous experience
the next three sessions were just
grueling ordeals
of purification they went on for hours
and hours and hours it lasted three
sessions over six months
what i came to understand eventually is
that
deeper states of consciousness are
higher states of energy
when you shift into a deeper state of
consciousness you are entering a
higher level of energy and you have to
acclimate to that energy
and that takes time and work you have to
go through a series of purification
processes cleansing processes and it's
hard to describe because
they're not personal purification
processes
you literally have to purify whatever
you are at the time
in order to stabilize consciousness at
these deeper levels of reality
and this repeats itself over and over
again
so much so that i came to dread
the session after a breakthrough session
when i have a breakthrough the next
session was usually a
turgid carrying out the garbage kind of
quality
right but you go through that you go
clean it up clean it up until you can
come back into that level of
consciousness
and maintain coherent cognition at that
level of consciousness
i began to have experiences of
reincarnation
as a collective process i began to
experience the human species
as a single organism that was
growing itself evolving itself
by incarnating all billions and billions
of its precious beings
simultaneously i began to understand
certain patterns
of reincarnation as an evolutionary
driver
not just as ind i had always thought of
the reincarnation as an individual story
the individual's person
grows matures makes individual choices
hopefully good choices but here i began
to experience
reincarnation as an evolutionary driver
an evolutionary dynamic that operated at
the collective level
simultaneously with the personal level
and at that point the wall between
personal karma and collective karma came
down completely
and i realized that there is no such
thing as private personal karma
personal karma and collective karma are
all deeply intertwined
and i wrote dark knight early dawn in
order to answer the question
why did my suffering go as deep and as
long
as it did in my sessions and the answer
is because
at this deep level of consciousness the
boundary between the individual and the
collective becomes very very porous
and if you are willing to you become an
agent of collective transformation in
this process
hiring right along after a year and a
half
and uh eight session a year and a half
and 11 sessions at the archetypal level
i entered into a year of extraordinary
blessings i entered into calls of
oneness
it was just non-stop joy
there are four sessions that i address
in the book describing this
the forest the birth of the diamond soul
singing the universe away in jesus blood
first one is experience of oneness
emptiness no self in me no self anywhere
in the world
singing the universe away was a an
experience of entering into the primal
void what stan
calls the metacosmic void the
the domain of the formless out of which
the light emerges that actually gives
birth to the physical universe
jesus's blood was an experience of
extraordinary cosmic love just being
loved like i've never been loved before
in this lifetime
the birth of the diamond soul let me
pause just for a second there because
it's really important
11 years before i had experienced my
life as a totality from start to finish
now i began to experience an ex where i
began to experience
all my former lives coming together they
were just coming in fast and furious and
it was like wrapping
a filament of white light around a kite
spool
and at a certain point when they hit
critical mass
and when they hit critical mass they
fused
and when they fused they exploded into
a diamond light it was my first contact
with what i came to call diamond light
and it was an experience which was
showing me where reincarnation is taking
humanity not exactly where but how it
works
reincarnation is not simply making
incremental
improvements in our life lifetime by
lifetime adding a layer adding a layer
it's true we do
but at a larger level
sooner or later if we keep this process
up we die we remember who we are
we're born we forget we learn we die we
remember we're born we
we forget we learn if we keep this up
lifetime after lifetime sooner or later
the soul the larger consciousness that
holds all of our lives
wakes up inside time and space
not just in the spiritual reality that
we return to when we die
but it wakes up inside time and space
that i call the birth of the diamond
soul just to put a language to it other
people have spoken about this
i think it is in a sense spiritual
awakening in the deepest sense
we it is that the emergence in history
of a fully integrated being that has
integrated
hundreds of thousands of years
experience
and has now been jumped into a quantum a
higher level
of awareness and functional
functionality
with tremendous expansion of compassion
for other human beings because we we've
had so many
lifetimes of experience with each other
and a profound transparency to the
universal creative intelligence
it's just it is a turning point in the
evolutionary story
i'm being pushed on time and absolutely
right to be so
and this is the most important chapter
of the book the birth of the future
human
when i started this work in 79 i didn't
think much about the future of the human
race
i didn't really understand much about
the ego crisis we were going into this
and yet this became one of the most
consistent recurring themes of my work
a series of visionary experiences that
kept showing me
over and over and over again humanity is
coming to a turning point humanity is
coming to a profound revision of its
foundation
humanity is coming into a time of great
awakening
over and over again great awakening
the turning point of history a before
and after moment in time
the visions of awakening is a collection
of six visions that i pull out of
different sessions i just group them
together in order to tell the story in a
coherent fashion
but i had not been shown how the
universe was possibly going to pull this
off how are we going to make this
transition
and then a year and a half later i went
into session 55 the great awakening
session
where i was taken deep into deep time
but not
personal deep time deep into collective
deep time
and i went into the future and i
experienced the death and rebirth
of our species
i wasn't a human being when i
experienced this i was
the entire i had merged into the field
of the collective psyche and i
experienced this crisis in history
as the species will experience it
i experienced a crisis that brought us
to our knees
a deep and profound unraveling a
shattering of life
as we had known it a profound
frightening time
but out of this process was born
an extraordinary being
a transformed humanity a shift in the
fundamental blueprint
of the human psyche and this was being
done not at the surface level
but at the deep level of the collective
unconscious this was a shift in the
blueprint
of our species i was also given a series
of initiations into
how this was actually going to be pulled
off and it
i don't have time to go into it maybe in
the
workshop retreat i'll be doing next week
where we talk it has to do with
understanding
the dynamics of the collective psyche
non-linear systems understanding how
systems uh
affect our how systems functions when
they're driven into non-linear states
we have a good understanding of what
happens to physical systems
when they're driven into non-linear
states well the human species
is the human unconscious is a
fundamental unified psychic field
my sense is that the great suffering
that we are entering
is going to energize is going to be so
widespread and so long
lasting it will literally energize the
collective psyche is never before in
human history
and when it is energized by such
terrible suffering
it will be capable of transforming
itself
in an historically unprecedented manner
and it will give birth
to the future human and i believe that
the future human
will be the diamond soul our future is
already encoded in our past
meaning that nature has been preparing
us for this event has been preparing for
us
for hundreds of thousands of years we
have been growing we have been
collecting information
collecting experiences going forward
going deeper
labor is a long i mean a birth excuse me
gestation
is a long process birth is a relatively
fast
process reincarnation has been gestating
the future human for generations after
generations after generation
we are coming into the time of birth
it's a hard time it's a scary time
it's a near-death experience kind of
time
but it's a process i think
which is giving birth to an
extraordinary creature
just an extraordinary creature
all right my time is used up so i have
to just pop this very quickly the
diamond luminosity
[Applause]
[Music]
will you give me five minutes of your
break okay
when i finished the greater reel of ark
and when i finished the benediction of
blessings i felt completely satisfied i
felt like i had given something in the
ocean of suffering work and i had been
rewarded by
more than i could possibly imagine i
felt completely at peace i had known
oneness i had been drenched in cosmic
love what more could you ask for
but there was still five years of work
to go
after going through yet one more very
very intense
death and rebirth process at a
cosmological level i was spun into
the domain of absolute transcendent
clarity light light as i had never known
light before
absolutely absolutely clear just
the buddhist are right just touching it
once just touching it once can undo
centuries of wandering around lost in
samsara
extraordinary purity dissolving into the
crystalline body of the divine
becoming light becoming light
your mind completely dissolved into the
light
which is the primal light before
existence before
physical existence manifest
the sessions there were out of 26
sessions
over four years i entered this reality
only four times
four times in 26 sessions
in between those four times more
purification
more purgation just tremendous cleansing
cleansing cleansing
and also interesting healing personal
healing which really surprised me
because i would have thought
personal healing would have come sooner
but here i was suddenly involved in
personal healing after years of working
at the collective level
and it took me a while to understand why
things were unfolding in this order
not time to talk about there but there
was a logic to it
there was an intention to it
i entered into the diamond luminosity
two times i went into
deeper and deeper into the diamond
luminosity and then the last two
diamond luminosity experiences were not
about going deeper into the universe
it was about the diamond luminosity
crunching itself deeper and deeper into
my physical body crunching itself into
my
psyche into my into my psychological
awareness but literally going right into
my physical body and changing the
physiological structure
of my cells that's what it felt like and
the pivot
came in the middle when i was in the
50th session
extremely the deepest i ever went
anywhere in the universe so i was in
this blissed-out
incredibly beautiful place
and all of a sudden everything pivoted
90 degrees
and i saw a reality that was extremely
far in the distance i saw whole worlds
in the far
distance and a light hit me from that
reality
i call it the absolute light just to
differentiate it's all at something
it hit me and it absolutely shattered me
and that's when i understood
this is an endless journey
i had thought i had picked up the idea i
had believed
that this journey you do it to get
somewhere to get there as an end point
to the journey
you get home and it's either oneness
with god or
entering in the primal void but there's
a point there's an
end point at this session
i let go of that idea and i realized
it's an
endless journey the infinite is much
much larger than any of our spiritual
traditions have
ever been able to grapple with yet it is
an
infinite process and that's why i would
be much gentler with myself if i were
doing this work again
i've learned that the process is not to
try to get to the end of the
end of the line the process is simply
open up
let as much of the creative intelligence
of the universe into you as you possibly
can
let it transform you let it break your
heart and open your heart
and then be patient with the slower pace
of our organic transformation
all right
the last the final vision gave me one
last vision
the final capstone of the entire
70 or 20-year journey it gave me it was
the capstone of the birth of the future
human it took me deep
it was put me through a terrible strip
down
took me deeper into time than i had ever
been taken before
and it gave me an intimate experience of
the future human
it gave me several different lessons and
it it gave me an experience
of the universe as a diamond maker
i experienced a swamp a very dark kind
of mud
which is represented the top soil of
reincarnation where everything all
individual life forms were dissolving
reconstituting dissolving reincarnating
dissolving reincarnating
and then there there were these sparks
of bright light
shooting off into the universe these
were diamond souls
these are fully integrated souls moving
into the universe
centers of integration capable of
integrating more and more levels of
consciousness
that the ego could alone could never
integrate
the universe is a diamond maker
the universe is growing sparks of
diamond luminosity
and it makes no difference to it or
makes
it makes a difference but it makes no
difference whether it takes a billion
years
or a million years for this process to
come to fruition
it is a very very patient process it has
created the cauldron of creativity
and it is taking us deep deep into
places that we can only imagine
the last session the last chapter
is coming off the mountain which i won't
talk about
but i learned that coming off the
mountain was
as hard as going up the mountain walking
away from such intimacy with the divine
walking away from such profound
immersion into the divine
reality into it's hard
once you have known the joy of
dissolving into light
time and space can begin to feel kind of
dried up
not very interesting it took me
10 years to really get back
into time and space to be grounded
to be and to be comfortable being
who i am what i am for the remaining
years of my life
here i don't know whether i would have
been able to make it
back fully if it had not been for the
love of my wife christina
thank you for letting me share this joy
this story with you it's a joy to bring
it to this particular community
uh we're going to be doing a workshop
friday saturday
which i hope will have more time to go
into it and one of the things i want to
experiment with
is can we use guided visualization
to open these places which are universal
they lie in all of
everybody's hearts and everybody's
experience in addition to having a
conversation about psychedelics and
protocols and methodology and the
different
experiences that different people have
gotten into in addition to that we're
going to explore using guided imagery
and deep relaxation
to sort of activate some of these deep
places
inside that live inside each of our
hearts thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]
you